But now we're moving to a part of our program.
We've truly grown to love.
It's entitled The Inside Story.
And, Brother Trent Lippold will be our host.
So, let's give Brother Lippold our attention
as he presents this The Inside Story.
Welcome to another edition of The Inside Story.
Today, we're going to meet four guests
from three continents representing the 148th class of Gilead.
We're going to hear stories of isolation,
a remarkable gift, and obedience.
In each case, we will see different faces of integrity.
Curious?
Well, let's meet our first guest then,
Salvador and Isabel Domingo from Angola.
Thank you.
Salvador Gile, welcome.
Yes, again, welcome.
So, you're both from Angola serving in the branch.
Sister Isabel, what is your assignment in the branch?
I work in translation department.
I do composition for one of our vernacular language.
Okay, which language is it?
I work with Chocue language.
Chocue?
Yes.
All right.
How do you say watchtower in Chocue?
Kaposhu Agutalila.
But, you know, Brother Lippold,
we don't need to learn the language to do composition,
because it's a technical process.
Well, thank you for learning the watchtower anyway.
Good.
And, Brother Salvador, your assignment?
I work in service department, preaching the desk,
and also I give support to branch office.
Okay, preaching needs desk in Angola.
What's the preaching like in Angola?
While preaching work in Angola is wonderful,
we have been seen the fulfillment of Hegai Chapter 2 verse 7.
Chahava is shaking the nation.
Many people are coming to the truth.
And since that people respond well to the good news,
usually we say that Sangala is a paradise for all publishers,
but especially for pioneers.
Okay, so he's shaking Angola?
Yes.
So, how many are coming in an Angola?
Well, right now we have more than 165,000 publishers,
and more than 720,000 Bible studies.
720,000 Bible studies.
Yes, more than.
That is absolutely amazing.
Isabel, the kind of growth you have in Angola,
what touches your heart about this?
What touches me most is seeing young ones come to the truth.
Young ones at 7, 8, 9, 10 years old, they start starting the Bible,
they start going at the meeting,
and many of them, without their parents,
and they make progress in the truth.
They start preaching with the congregation, they get baptized,
and some of them they start working as our auxiliary pioneer.
So, this is something amazing to see.
This really touched my heart.
Beautiful, yeah.
And Salvador, for you, when you look at the growth,
how does it affect you?
What touches you?
Seeing how Chahava has been blessing the work in our branch territory,
is something amazing.
For example, I remember when I was invited for the first time to attend a meeting,
that meeting was held in a brothers' home,
and we used a bedroom as a place to help the meeting,
because we were on the ban.
But sometime later, since that more people were coming,
we needed to move from that bedroom to the same house,
to the dining room.
And some months later, with more people coming,
a little bit more freedom,
we needed to move from that dining room to the courtyard,
same house, the same house.
And from that time on, many congregations in Angola
started using courtyards of brothers' home to help meetings.
But now the situation is completely different.
So seeing the transition from courtyards of brothers' home
to a nice kingdom hall built with the help of Chahava's organization,
is something that touched my heart.
See how Chahava takes care of his people by means of his organization.
That's beautiful.
So what is the situation like with kingdom halls in Angola?
Well, right now we have many congregations
that are sharing one kingdom hall.
For example, in one kingdom hall, one auditorium,
then 11, 13, even right now,
we receive information about a kingdom hall
that there is 14 congregations using.
So we have a huge need of mocking the halls in Angola.
Would you say that's one of the biggest needs right now in Angola?
Yes.
But many people are coming to the truth.
Theocratic facilities is a big need in Angola.
We need space in Bethel.
We need more assembly halls.
We need facilities for SBE, especially kingdom halls.
And we have a video that shows the big need of kingdom halls that we have in Angola.
We will enjoy it to see this.
Okay, excellent. Let's watch it.
On the southwest coast of Africa, sits Angola.
Home to lush jungle hillsides,
vast desert plains,
and tropical Atlantic beaches.
But even more beautiful is the love that the people of Angola demonstrate for Bible truths.
The growth rate of kingdom proclaimers has vastly outpaced kingdom hall construction.
With some kingdom halls hosting as many as 14 congregations.
Imagine the coordination challenges this creates for the publishers and for the bodies of elders.
To accommodate all the weekend meetings at Mustache Place,
some begin at 6.30 in the morning,
and they continue to be held all day long.
For midweek meetings, some congregations will start early in the afternoon.
Supporting these schedules could potentially jeopardize our brothers' employment.
Therefore, they prayerfully negotiate with their employers to get off work,
one or two hours early on meeting days.
The later meetings that follow can last reliant to the night.
The elders cooperates so that everyone can get the best.
They decide that the congregation that stays far from the kingdom hall
have priority to show the right time for them,
so that they can feel comfortable because of the distance.
Once the kingdom hall is full,
the congregation spells outside the building forming lines of the windows.
In all cases, all their brothers and sisters lovingly put the needs and welfare of others ahead of their own.
With the building in constant use,
when do the congregation schedule time for maintenance and cleaning?
It takes careful coordination under the direction of the Kingdom Hall Maintenance Committee
to ensure the building stays clean, safe and very comfortable.
Our brothers and sisters in Angola are a gloved disparate
and cooperate together in beautiful ways,
providing a witness to all unlookers that Tehoba is a God of order and peace.
Thank you. I mean, that was very, very interesting.
When I look at the flexibility and the cooperation of the brothers and sisters in Angola with the Kingdom Hall,
I will appreciate whatever meeting time our congregation has assigned.
It's just so beautiful to see the spirit of preaching in Angola.
Many brothers, they step over to unassigned territories
and others, they go to seldom work territory to help congregation with few publishers.
That is why, for example, Brother Leipold, last service, E.M.,
we had 20 new sequels last service, E.M.
20? Yes. This service, E.M., from September until now, we have already...
Should I hold on?
We have already 97 new congregations.
97? Yes.
That's almost 100 new congregations in just a few months.
Yes.
That is a tremendous, tremendous spirit, just to see the obedience of the brothers and sisters in Angola
for preaching. What a beautiful example for all of us.
Well, thank you both for being here and sharing these experiences with us
and the spirit of the brothers and sisters in Angola.
Thank you.
Let's introduce our next guest, it's Brother Ho Chang from Korea.
Thank you very much.
So, where the Chang you are serving in the Korea branch, and what is your assignment?
I work with the legal department and last year, our branch renovated a historical museum
while branch, and I had a privilege to participate in the project, especially working with the integrity section
of the historical museum with other true brothers, and we had very encouraging experiences.
Very nice. Integrity Korea, we think of young brothers and conscientious objection.
Is that what the integrity part of the museum was about?
To renovate the section, brothers and sisters were invited to donate meaningful historical artifacts.
So, we received a lot of valuable items from them.
One of them was very, very special to us. What was it?
It was a photograph.
We received from a special pioneer brother. This is the photo.
Very interesting.
Brother, what do you think? What is this picture and where it was taken?
Well, it obviously looks like at a military, some kind of military place.
It looks like a young brother. He's being offered a uniform, and this is him refusing the military uniform.
Yeah, that's right. It was in a military camp. It is not a reenactment, it is a real situation.
Brothers in Korea forcefully were taken to the military camp for enlistment, sometimes from home,
and sometimes even from the kingdom holds.
And as we can see in this picture, they were forced to take arms to be soldier.
So, this is not, he's not been brought from court or anything like that.
He had right on the spot he has to take his stand.
Yes, that's right.
So, you said a special pioneer sent the photograph.
How did he get the photo?
Actually, this photo was taken in 1988 by a military police investigator.
He wanted to use this photo as an evidence to charge this brother.
But he was so touched by his firm standing, so he kept this photo for almost 20 years.
And in 2007, the special pioneer visited him during House to House Ministry.
He gave this photo to him, even recalling the name of the brother.
And he said, please give this back to him.
Wow. So, when you received the photograph, you and the other two brothers, when you saw it for the first time,
what did you think?
We all just agree that it is a gift.
It is a special gift from Jehovah without, it is impossible.
Just the existence of this photo is impossible.
And it has been kept for almost 20 years.
And then through the special pioneer, we have it.
It is also impossible.
Why did you feel so strongly that it's impossible?
We didn't take this picture.
The investigator took it and he kept it.
And we have it, but the timing is also very important.
Because it's after the two monumental decisions in highest courts,
and then all the impressive brothers were released.
And then we now have this photo.
So, this was just last year in 2019.
So, we thought Jehovah was commanding all the brothers who did their best,
according to their Bible-trained conscience, to keep their integrity.
And Jehovah was saying, I still remember your integrity.
Thank you so much. We felt the way.
It's very powerful. I can feel that also.
Did you, were you able to find the brother?
Yes, we did.
He is now serving on elder.
He had three children.
He never expected that he can see this picture.
He knew that he was taken.
Did he know the photograph was taken?
Yes.
And then he remembered the investigator because he was favorable to him.
And he relayed one encouraging story from him.
The investigator, for his work, he attended convention in 1988.
Our convention?
Yes.
For his work.
And then he received the book.
Do you remember the book, Revelation book?
1988.
Yes.
And he gave this book to this brother in the count.
Yes. And he said, maybe here you may be relaxed, maybe in prison,
more severe, just enjoy this book.
He was unbelievable.
Yes.
So he missed the convention.
But he got the release.
Yes.
That's quite a story.
So what happened when the photo was shown?
What was the response of his children?
Yes. They were all surprised at that.
The eldest son, he surprised because his father was always happy and smiles.
But he was so serious in this picture.
So he was able to understand how determined his father in order to keep his integrity.
And the second son, he found out that his father looked very similar.
So the two looked alike.
Yes.
The young son and the father.
So he found himself in this photo.
So all the family members was able to visualize what would be like keeping integrity.
And it was really encouraging all of them.
Well, I think it's really true what the young son has said, seeing himself in this picture.
Because in many ways, it is him in this picture.
And it's you in this picture.
And it's me in this picture.
It's all of us.
When we take our stand for Jehovah, when we're loyal to him, whether it's a young person in school,
not saluting the flag or not participating in a false religious holiday with worldly relatives.
Or at work, again, not participating in things, taking a stand for Jehovah.
So really, this is a gift for all of Jehovah's people to remind us of what it means to show our integrity and be loyal to Jehovah.
Thank you very, very much for sharing this with us.
Thank you very much.
Well, let's meet our next guest.
He's from Chile, and his name is Alan Kim.
Thank you very much.
I just have you on the inside story.
Thank you very much for inviting.
So, Brother Kim, you're born in Chile, raised in Chile?
Actually, I was born in Chile, but I was raised in Brazil.
And then we moved to Chile, and my parents are Korean.
Okay.
Did you speak Spanish when you came back to Chile?
I had to learn Spanish.
Yes.
When did you come back to Chile?
I was about 14 years old when we moved with my family.
Okay, so what was that like?
14 years old, speak Portuguese, and now coming to Chile, having to learn Spanish.
It wasn't easy at first, because Chile is not a country that was used to receive many foreigners.
So, I just seen our family, an Asian looking family, was caught many attention in Chile.
So, when we were walking in the streets, we were going to a store.
Many people used to look at us, point at us, and also talk about us.
We had some bad experiences also.
So, as a young person, how did that make you feel?
As a teenager, you know that it's not easy to receive that kind of treatment in some places.
And also, added to that, you have to be acquainted with their food, it's a new place, new culture.
So, you have a problem of identity, because you are one country, you have another culture,
you was raised in another culture.
So, it wasn't easy to find myself, my place.
So, sometimes even among many people, you can feel a little bit isolated, and that you don't belong anywhere.
That's interesting.
Probably, on a lot of people, a lot of brothers and sisters even can relate to what you're saying,
sometimes feeling that way, not sure where you fit in for various reasons.
What changed for you?
Yes, a big help was association with brothers and sisters.
Especially, I remember, our congregation was invited to attend a special international convention in Chile in 2003.
And that was a very special moment, because it was my first time in such a big event of Jehovah witnesses
and seeing brothers from all around the world.
No one judging you by your look or having difference.
Just being there, seeing everyone happy, united.
That was a very big moment for me, and I could understand, well, this is really Jehovah's organization.
This is the place I should be.
We have a picture here of you, this is at the international convention.
That's right, that was the same year that we arrived in Chile, and it's my family attending that convention.
Very nice.
You've changed your hair since then.
Yes.
So you've found your place now in the congregation, and things really started to progress for you?
Yes, as I started to progress spiritually, I could meet many brothers and sisters that was a big help for us.
For example, I remember one single brother that was from our congregation, a Korean brother raised in Chile,
went to MTS, and he was assigned back to our congregation with another Chilean brother,
and well, just seeing their example, and later many other brothers helped us to find my place in the organization.
So the congregation, was this a Spanish congregation?
It was a Korean congregation.
You're in a Korean congregation, and you have a Chilean Korean brother assigned to your congregation,
together with a Chilean brother.
Did he speak Korean?
He was learning Korean when he arrived.
He had to learn.
So the three of you then, you made a good partnership, and really positive influence on you.
That's absolutely beautiful.
So you're working in the branch now in Chile?
Yes.
I'm working in the Chile branch in the service department,
and helping the preaching needs desk.
Okay, but like Salvador then, what's the preaching like in Chile?
We have many places, remote areas, especially in the southern part of Chile,
where territories are very big, so brothers have to, sometimes they have to travel for many hours by car,
or even there are places that they can't reach by car.
So the congregation have to arrange a preaching campaign that can be days,
seven days walking, sleeping in tents, sometimes even washing themselves in the river,
and they try to reach those places, remote places, to two or three houses.
Wow, that sounds exciting.
The first photograph you've brought for us, where is this?
This place is called Aysen region, and this place, the brothers have to drive for many hours,
just to reach a small town, or a few people that live in remote areas.
Good, and the next photograph, where is this area?
Well, this is a southern part of Chile.
It's called Adalgarina region, and many people live there, especially people that speak Mapudongong.
They also have many remote areas that brothers have to walk to reach.
Okay, and the next photograph you have, I mean, that's quite a feeling.
Yes, this is one of the most remote areas, in the most southern part of Chile,
and also the brothers arrange to preach in those places.
This is called Toro del Bainé.
Very nice.
But it's amazing to see the efforts that the branch is making to reach these really remote areas in Chile.
Yes, brothers and sisters are working hard, even to reach a few people,
so we can say that they are doing a good work.
Good, yeah.
Very, very remote in these places, so is that?
This is in the most southern part of Chile, is that as far as you go?
Actually, this is not one of the most remote areas.
We have another place that are more isolated in that area.
I brought a video that I want to show you.
Do you want to see?
Yes, please.
More than 2,000 miles of open ocean, separate Easter Island from the west coast of South America.
Yet, even here, on this remote island with less than 8,000 inhabitants,
the good news of God's Kingdom is being preached.
And the publishers in this seemingly isolated field,
filled the full support of Jehovah's Organization.
This Kingdom Hall and translation office was built in 2016.
Here, five brothers and sisters work to translate spiritual food
into the native Polynesian language of Rapanui, ensuring that local publishers
receive the same spiritual food as their brothers and sisters around the world.
Translation personnel receive benefit from Bethel's spiritual programs,
despite being two time zones away from the branch office in Santiago, Chile.
Here, in the middle of the ocean, I feel how Jehovah loves me and gives me his strength
job by taking care of all of us in the island.
The Chile branch also supports Kingdom publishers on Ravi San Cruzo Island.
Although much closer to the mainland, just over 400 miles away,
it's more challenging to reach.
The journey involves flight and then a boat ride from the isolated airport
to the inhabited part of the island, which can only be traveled when the seas aren't too rough.
But despite these challenges, our brothers and sisters receive constant and timely spiritual food,
LDC support and shepherding.
For years, Ravi San Cruzo Island was home to just five spiritual sisters.
With the help of the LDC, a small Kingdom Hall was remodeled and a two-room apartment was added.
This made it possible for two single-welders to move to the island,
where they now assist with preaching and shepherding.
Although traveling here is not for the faint of heart,
this congregation of eight publishers receives a visit from their sickid overseer twice a year.
The visit lasts for two or three weeks each time, providing extra spiritual support to these faithful ones.
It doesn't matter where you live.
If you're in the city and the countryside, even in a place like this,
in the middle of the ocean, Jehovah is with us.
Those who preach and those who respond to the good news receive abundant spiritual care.
Resulting in a unified worldwide brotherhood that praises our great God, Jehovah.
As beautiful as I see the efforts of the branch is making to care for brothers and sisters in such remote islands.
And I thought it was interesting as well that, for example, in Robinson Cruzo Island,
the circuit overseer will stay there for two or three weeks because it is so isolated.
Most of the time, he spent two weeks just to encourage the brothers that are so isolated.
And sometimes he even spent one additional week, almost three weeks, to combine with a sickid assembly.
Very nice. It's a nice arrangement that the branch has to care for this particular island.
Yes, and there is another island that the circuit overseers from Chile are visiting,
and that's the Falkland Island.
In this year, we have an arrangement to send a circuit overseer and just to encourage the brothers and sisters.
That's amazing, very nice. I mean, brothers and Chile, you're not afraid of remote places, that's for sure.
Yes. Actually, these places that we just saw are not the most remote areas.
We have one place that we also could reach a few years ago,
and that's the Antarctica, as you can see in the photo.
You're kidding me.
You mean the branch in Chile has supported the work in Antarctica?
Yes.
I imagine it's very difficult to get there.
Yes. It's very hard because first we need permission and we have to fly,
so the branch have to make some arrangements to reach a couple in that area.
Very nice. Well, thank you very much, Alan.
Thank you for sharing this information with us and helping us to see that,
even though we're isolated, we're not alone.
You really feel Chile is your home?
Yes. Of course, as you can see, Chile is a beautiful place with many good brothers and sisters.
Also, it really doesn't matter where really are physically.
If we are with Jehovah and his organization, we are in the Great Spiritual Temple,
so we can feel whatever we are, we can feel that's our home.
Beautiful. Thank you very much, Alan, for showing my request.
Integrity has been described as wholehearted love for an unbreakable devotion to the person of Jehovah,
so that his will comes first in all of our decisions.
And our guests today have shown us different faces of integrity,
like obedience and cooperation in preaching and meeting together,
or maintaining loyalty when you come face-to-face with tests,
or if you feel isolated, or are literally geographically isolated,
you can maintain unbreakable devotion to Jehovah.
The Psalmist wrote,
If I should fly away with the wings of the dawn to reside by the most remote sea,
even there your hand would lead me and your right hand would take hold of me.
Clearly, Jehovah sees our acts of integrity and he loves us for it.
Please join us on another edition of the Inside Story.
You would think we have about 500 here in the audience,
but that was again a faith-strengthening program.
It's amazing, some of the experiences things happening in various parts of the earth.
What a treat that was.